apps/docs/docs/server/faq/common-problems.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: Common Problems
---

# Common Problems

Solutions to frequently encountered issues when working with Navios.

## TypeScript Configuration

Navios uses **TypeScript 5 native decorators** (ES decorators), not the legacy experimental decorators. This means your `tsconfig.json` must have the experimental decorator options **disabled** (or omitted, as `false` is the default).

### Correct Configuration

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES2022",
    "module": "NodeNext",
    "moduleResolution": "NodeNext",
    "strict": true,
    "skipLibCheck": true,
    "verbatimModuleSyntax": true,
    "experimentalDecorators": false,
    "emitDecoratorMetadata": false
  }
}
```

Key settings for ESM projects:
- `"module": "NodeNext"` - Enables ES modules with Node.js interop
- `"moduleResolution": "NodeNext"` - Uses Node.js ESM resolution algorithm
- `"verbatimModuleSyntax": true` - Enforces explicit `type` imports

### Common Mistake

If you previously used NestJS or other frameworks that rely on legacy decorators, you might have these options enabled:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "experimentalDecorators": true,
    "emitDecoratorMetadata": true
  }
}
```

**These must be set to `false` or removed entirely** for Navios decorators to work correctly.

### Why This Matters

- **Legacy decorators** (`experimentalDecorators: true`) use a different specification and runtime behavior
- **Native decorators** (TypeScript 5+) follow the TC39 Stage 3 decorator proposal
- Mixing these will cause decorators to silently fail or produce unexpected behavior

## ES Decorators Support in Bun

Bun does not yet fully support ES decorators natively. To run Navios applications with Bun, you need to use a plugin that transpiles TypeScript files with proper decorator support.

### Solution: Bun Plugin with TypeScript

Create a `bun-plugin.mts` file in your project root:

```typescript
// bun-plugin.mts
import { plugin } from 'bun'

plugin({
  name: 'typescript-decorators',
  setup(build) {
    const filter = /\.m?(ts|tsx)$/

    build.onLoad({ filter }, async (args) => {
      const codeTs = await Bun.file(args.path).text()
      const typescript = (await import('typescript')).default

      const result = typescript.transpileModule(codeTs, {
        compilerOptions: {
          module: typescript.ModuleKind.ESNext,
          target: typescript.ScriptTarget.ESNext,
          jsx: typescript.JsxEmit.React,
        },
      })

      return {
        loader: 'js',
        contents: result.outputText,
      }
    })
  },
})
```

### Configure Bun to Use the Plugin

Create or update `bunfig.toml` in your project root:

```toml
preload = ["./bun-plugin.mts"]
```

### Install TypeScript

```bash
bun add -d typescript
```

### How It Works

1. The plugin intercepts all `.ts` and `.tsx` file loads
2. Uses TypeScript to transpile the code with proper ES decorator support
3. Returns the transpiled JavaScript to Bun's runtime

### Development Mode with File Watching

Bun's `--watch` flag doesn't work correctly with plugins. Add manual file watching for hot reload during development:

```typescript
// bun-plugin.mts
import fs from 'fs'

import { plugin } from 'bun'

const RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME = 'bunPlugin.reload.ts'

plugin({
  name: 'typescript-decorators',
  setup(build) {
    const filter = /\.m?(ts|tsx)$/
    const watchFileSet = new Set<string | null>()

    // Manual file watcher for dev mode
    const folderToWatch = import.meta.dir + '/src/'
    fs.watch(folderToWatch, { recursive: true }, (event, filename) => {
      if (watchFileSet.has(filename)) {
        // Trigger reload by writing to a hack file
        void Bun.file(`./${RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME}`).write(
          `// ${Math.random()}\n`
        )
      }
    })

    build.onLoad({ filter }, async (args) => {
      // Track loaded files for watching
      watchFileSet.add(args.path.replace(folderToWatch, ''))

      const codeTs = await Bun.file(args.path).text()
      const typescript = (await import('typescript')).default

      const result = typescript.transpileModule(codeTs, {
        compilerOptions: {
          module: typescript.ModuleKind.ESNext,
          target: typescript.ScriptTarget.ESNext,
          jsx: typescript.JsxEmit.React,
        },
      })

      return {
        loader: 'js',
        contents: result.outputText,
      }
    })
  },
})
```

Create the reload hack file:

```typescript
// bunPlugin.reload.ts
// This file is auto-modified to trigger reloads
```

Run with watch mode:

```bash
bun --watch src/main.ts
```

### Performance Optimization

Add caching to avoid re-transpiling unchanged files:

```typescript
// bun-plugin.mts
import fs from 'fs'

import { plugin } from 'bun'

const RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME = 'bunPlugin.reload.ts'
const cache = new Map<string, string>()

plugin({
  name: 'typescript-decorators',
  setup(build) {
    const filter = /\.m?(ts|tsx)$/
    const watchFileSet = new Set<string | null>()

    const folderToWatch = import.meta.dir + '/src/'
    fs.watch(folderToWatch, { recursive: true }, (event, filename) => {
      if (watchFileSet.has(filename)) {
        void Bun.file(`./${RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME}`).write(
          `// ${Math.random()}\n`
        )
      }
    })

    build.onLoad({ filter }, async (args) => {
      watchFileSet.add(args.path.replace(folderToWatch, ''))

      const codeTs = await Bun.file(args.path).text()

      // Check cache
      const cached = cache.get(codeTs)
      if (cached) {
        return { loader: 'js', contents: cached }
      }

      const typescript = (await import('typescript')).default
      const result = typescript.transpileModule(codeTs, {
        compilerOptions: {
          module: typescript.ModuleKind.ESNext,
          target: typescript.ScriptTarget.ESNext,
          jsx: typescript.JsxEmit.React,
        },
      })

      cache.set(codeTs, result.outputText)
      return { loader: 'js', contents: result.outputText }
    })
  },
})
```

### Alternative: Use Node.js

If you don't need Bun-specific features, consider using the Fastify adapter with Node.js, which has full native support for ES decorators when using TypeScript 5+ with `tsx` or similar tools.

Commit message:

docs: Update optimistic updates and DI documentation with experimental API warnings
- Added warnings for experimental APIs in the optimistic updates guide, recommending the manual pattern for production use.
- Enhanced the FAQ and setup documentation for dependency injection, introducing legacy decorators for projects with `experimentalDecorators` enabled.
- Updated the DI React documentation to reflect changes in the `useInvalidate` hook, now renamed to `useInvalidateInstance`, with examples demonstrating its usage.
- Improved best practices and recipes to emphasize the use of `refetch` for local refreshes instead of invalidation.

apps/docs/docs/server/faq/common-problems.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: Common Problems
---

# Common Problems

Solutions to frequently encountered issues when working with Navios.

## TypeScript Configuration

Navios uses **TypeScript 5 native decorators** (ES decorators), not the legacy experimental decorators. This means your `tsconfig.json` must have the experimental decorator options **disabled** (or omitted, as `false` is the default).

### Correct Configuration

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES2022",
    "module": "NodeNext",
    "moduleResolution": "NodeNext",
    "strict": true,
    "skipLibCheck": true,
    "verbatimModuleSyntax": true,
    "experimentalDecorators": false,
    "emitDecoratorMetadata": false
  }
}
```

Key settings for ESM projects:
- `"module": "NodeNext"` - Enables ES modules with Node.js interop
- `"moduleResolution": "NodeNext"` - Uses Node.js ESM resolution algorithm
- `"verbatimModuleSyntax": true` - Enforces explicit `type` imports

### Common Mistake

If you previously used NestJS or other frameworks that rely on legacy decorators, you might have these options enabled:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "experimentalDecorators": true,
    "emitDecoratorMetadata": true
  }
}
```

**These must be set to `false` or removed entirely** for Navios decorators to work correctly.

:::tip Alternative: Legacy Decorators
If you cannot disable `experimentalDecorators`, you can use the legacy-compatible decorators from `@navios/core/legacy-compat` and `@navios/di/legacy-compat`. See the [NestJS Migration Guide](/docs/server/guides/migrating-from-nestjs#step-2-configure-typescript) for details.
:::

### Why This Matters

- **Legacy decorators** (`experimentalDecorators: true`) use a different specification and runtime behavior
- **Native decorators** (TypeScript 5+) follow the TC39 Stage 3 decorator proposal
- Mixing these will cause decorators to silently fail or produce unexpected behavior

## ES Decorators Support in Bun

Bun does not yet fully support ES decorators natively. To run Navios applications with Bun, you need to use a plugin that transpiles TypeScript files with proper decorator support.

### Solution: Bun Plugin with TypeScript

Create a `bun-plugin.mts` file in your project root:

```typescript
// bun-plugin.mts
import { plugin } from 'bun'

plugin({
  name: 'typescript-decorators',
  setup(build) {
    const filter = /\.m?(ts|tsx)$/

    build.onLoad({ filter }, async (args) => {
      const codeTs = await Bun.file(args.path).text()
      const typescript = (await import('typescript')).default

      const result = typescript.transpileModule(codeTs, {
        compilerOptions: {
          module: typescript.ModuleKind.ESNext,
          target: typescript.ScriptTarget.ESNext,
          jsx: typescript.JsxEmit.React,
        },
      })

      return {
        loader: 'js',
        contents: result.outputText,
      }
    })
  },
})
```

### Configure Bun to Use the Plugin

Create or update `bunfig.toml` in your project root:

```toml
preload = ["./bun-plugin.mts"]
```

### Install TypeScript

```bash
bun add -d typescript
```

### How It Works

1. The plugin intercepts all `.ts` and `.tsx` file loads
2. Uses TypeScript to transpile the code with proper ES decorator support
3. Returns the transpiled JavaScript to Bun's runtime

### Development Mode with File Watching

Bun's `--watch` flag doesn't work correctly with plugins. Add manual file watching for hot reload during development:

```typescript
// bun-plugin.mts
import fs from 'fs'

import { plugin } from 'bun'

const RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME = 'bunPlugin.reload.ts'

plugin({
  name: 'typescript-decorators',
  setup(build) {
    const filter = /\.m?(ts|tsx)$/
    const watchFileSet = new Set<string | null>()

    // Manual file watcher for dev mode
    const folderToWatch = import.meta.dir + '/src/'
    fs.watch(folderToWatch, { recursive: true }, (event, filename) => {
      if (watchFileSet.has(filename)) {
        // Trigger reload by writing to a hack file
        void Bun.file(`./${RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME}`).write(
          `// ${Math.random()}\n`
        )
      }
    })

    build.onLoad({ filter }, async (args) => {
      // Track loaded files for watching
      watchFileSet.add(args.path.replace(folderToWatch, ''))

      const codeTs = await Bun.file(args.path).text()
      const typescript = (await import('typescript')).default

      const result = typescript.transpileModule(codeTs, {
        compilerOptions: {
          module: typescript.ModuleKind.ESNext,
          target: typescript.ScriptTarget.ESNext,
          jsx: typescript.JsxEmit.React,
        },
      })

      return {
        loader: 'js',
        contents: result.outputText,
      }
    })
  },
})
```

Create the reload hack file:

```typescript
// bunPlugin.reload.ts
// This file is auto-modified to trigger reloads
```

Run with watch mode:

```bash
bun --watch src/main.ts
```

### Performance Optimization

Add caching to avoid re-transpiling unchanged files:

```typescript
// bun-plugin.mts
import fs from 'fs'

import { plugin } from 'bun'

const RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME = 'bunPlugin.reload.ts'
const cache = new Map<string, string>()

plugin({
  name: 'typescript-decorators',
  setup(build) {
    const filter = /\.m?(ts|tsx)$/
    const watchFileSet = new Set<string | null>()

    const folderToWatch = import.meta.dir + '/src/'
    fs.watch(folderToWatch, { recursive: true }, (event, filename) => {
      if (watchFileSet.has(filename)) {
        void Bun.file(`./${RELOAD_HACK_FILENAME}`).write(
          `// ${Math.random()}\n`
        )
      }
    })

    build.onLoad({ filter }, async (args) => {
      watchFileSet.add(args.path.replace(folderToWatch, ''))

      const codeTs = await Bun.file(args.path).text()

      // Check cache
      const cached = cache.get(codeTs)
      if (cached) {
        return { loader: 'js', contents: cached }
      }

      const typescript = (await import('typescript')).default
      const result = typescript.transpileModule(codeTs, {
        compilerOptions: {
          module: typescript.ModuleKind.ESNext,
          target: typescript.ScriptTarget.ESNext,
          jsx: typescript.JsxEmit.React,
        },
      })

      cache.set(codeTs, result.outputText)
      return { loader: 'js', contents: result.outputText }
    })
  },
})
```

### Alternative: Use Node.js

If you don't need Bun-specific features, consider using the Fastify adapter with Node.js, which has full native support for ES decorators when using TypeScript 5+ with `tsx` or similar tools.
