apps/docs/docs/builder/react-query/guides/optimistic-updates.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 10
---

# Optimistic Updates

Optimistic updates allow you to update the UI immediately before the server responds, providing a better user experience. If the mutation fails, you can rollback the changes.

## Using the Helper (Recommended)

The `createOptimisticUpdate` helper simplifies the optimistic update pattern by handling the boilerplate:

```typescript
import { createOptimisticUpdate } from '@navios/react-query'

const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  ...createOptimisticUpdate({
    queryKey: ['users', userId],
    updateFn: (oldData, variables) => ({
      ...oldData,
      ...variables.data,
    }),
  }),
})
```

### Configuration Options

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `queryKey` | `readonly unknown[]` | Required | The query key to optimistically update |
| `updateFn` | `(oldData, variables) => newData` | Required | Function to compute the new cache value |
| `rollbackOnError` | `boolean` | `true` | Whether to rollback on error |
| `invalidateOnSettled` | `boolean` | `true` | Whether to invalidate the query after mutation settles |

### Multi-Query Updates

When a mutation affects multiple cached queries, use `createMultiOptimisticUpdate`:

```typescript
import { createMultiOptimisticUpdate } from '@navios/react-query'

const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  ...createMultiOptimisticUpdate([
    {
      // Update individual user cache
      queryKey: ['users', userId],
      updateFn: (oldData, variables) => ({
        ...oldData,
        ...variables.data,
      }),
    },
    {
      // Update user in the list
      queryKey: ['users'],
      updateFn: (oldList, variables) =>
        (oldList ?? []).map((user) =>
          user.id === userId ? { ...user, ...variables.data } : user
        ),
    },
  ]),
})
```

### Common Patterns with Helpers

**Optimistic Delete:**

```typescript
const deleteTodo = client.mutation({
  method: 'DELETE',
  url: '/todos/$todoId',
  responseSchema: z.object({ success: z.boolean() }),
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({ queryClient: useQueryClient() }),
  ...createOptimisticUpdate({
    queryKey: ['todos'],
    updateFn: (oldData, variables) =>
      (oldData ?? []).filter((t) => t.id !== variables.urlParams.todoId),
  }),
})
```

**Optimistic Add:**

```typescript
const addTodo = client.mutation({
  method: 'POST',
  url: '/todos',
  requestSchema: createTodoSchema,
  responseSchema: todoSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({ queryClient: useQueryClient() }),
  ...createOptimisticUpdate({
    queryKey: ['todos'],
    updateFn: (oldData, variables) => [
      ...(oldData ?? []),
      { id: 'temp-' + Date.now(), ...variables.data, createdAt: new Date() },
    ],
  }),
})
```

## Manual Pattern

For more control, you can implement the pattern manually.

### Pattern Overview

The manual optimistic update pattern involves:

1. **onMutate**: Cancel queries, snapshot previous value, optimistically update
2. **onError**: Rollback to previous value
3. **onSuccess/onSettled**: Refetch to ensure consistency

### Manual Example

```typescript
const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    // 1. Cancel outgoing queries
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUser.queryKey.filterKey({
        urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
      }),
    })

    // 2. Snapshot previous value
    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUser.queryKey.dataTag({
        urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
      })
    )

    // 3. Optimistically update
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUser.queryKey.dataTag({
        urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
      }),
      { ...previous, ...variables.data }
    )

    // 4. Return context for rollback
    return { previous }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    // Rollback on error
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUser.queryKey.dataTag({
          urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
        }),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
  onSuccess: (data, variables, context) => {
    // Optionally refetch to ensure consistency
    context.queryClient.invalidateQueries({
      queryKey: getUser.queryKey.filterKey({
        urlParams: { userId: data.id },
      }),
    })
  },
})
```

## Updating Lists

Optimistically update items in a list:

```typescript
const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUsers.queryKey.filterKey({}),
    })

    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({})
    )

    // Update item in list
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return old
        return {
          ...old,
          users: old.users.map((user) =>
            user.id === variables.urlParams.userId
              ? { ...user, ...variables.data }
              : user
          ),
        }
      }
    )

    return { previous }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
})
```

## Adding to Lists

Optimistically add items to a list:

```typescript
const createUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'POST',
  url: '/users',
  requestSchema: userCreateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUsers.queryKey.filterKey({}),
    })

    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({})
    )

    // Optimistically add new user
    const optimisticUser = {
      id: 'temp-' + Date.now(),
      ...variables.data,
      createdAt: new Date().toISOString(),
    }

    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return { users: [optimisticUser] }
        return {
          ...old,
          users: [optimisticUser, ...old.users],
        }
      }
    )

    return { previous, optimisticUser }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
  onSuccess: (data, variables, context) => {
    // Replace optimistic user with real data
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return old
        return {
          ...old,
          users: old.users.map((user) =>
            user.id === context.onMutateResult?.optimisticUser.id
              ? data
              : user
          ),
        }
      }
    )
  },
})
```

## Removing from Lists

Optimistically remove items from a list:

```typescript
const deleteUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'DELETE',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  responseSchema: z.object({ success: z.boolean() }),
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUsers.queryKey.filterKey({}),
    })

    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({})
    )

    // Optimistically remove user
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return old
        return {
          ...old,
          users: old.users.filter(
            (user) => user.id !== variables.urlParams.userId
          ),
        }
      }
    )

    return { previous }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
})
```

## Best Practices

### Always Cancel Queries

```typescript
// ✅ Good - cancel queries first
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({ queryKey: ['users'] })
  // ... rest of logic
}

// ❌ Bad - may cause race conditions
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  // Missing cancelQueries
  context.queryClient.setQueryData(/* ... */)
}
```

### Snapshot Previous Value

```typescript
// ✅ Good - save previous for rollback
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(/* ... */)
  // ... update
  return { previous }
}

// ❌ Bad - can't rollback
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  context.queryClient.setQueryData(/* ... */)
  // No previous value saved
}
```

### Rollback on Error

```typescript
// ✅ Good - rollback on error
onError: (error, variables, context) => {
  if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(/* ... */, context.onMutateResult.previous)
  }
}

// ❌ Bad - no rollback
onError: (error, variables, context) => {
  // UI stays in optimistic state even on error
}
```

## Next Steps

- [Context in Mutations](/docs/builder/react-query/guides/mutation-context) - Access QueryClient
- [Mutations](/docs/builder/react-query/guides/mutations) - Basic mutations
- [Query Keys](/docs/builder/react-query/guides/query-keys) - Understand query keys

Commit message:

docs: Update optimistic updates and DI documentation with experimental API warnings
- Added warnings for experimental APIs in the optimistic updates guide, recommending the manual pattern for production use.
- Enhanced the FAQ and setup documentation for dependency injection, introducing legacy decorators for projects with `experimentalDecorators` enabled.
- Updated the DI React documentation to reflect changes in the `useInvalidate` hook, now renamed to `useInvalidateInstance`, with examples demonstrating its usage.
- Improved best practices and recipes to emphasize the use of `refetch` for local refreshes instead of invalidation.

apps/docs/docs/builder/react-query/guides/optimistic-updates.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 10
---

# Optimistic Updates

Optimistic updates allow you to update the UI immediately before the server responds, providing a better user experience. If the mutation fails, you can rollback the changes.

## Using the Helper

:::warning Experimental API
The `createOptimisticUpdate` and `createMultiOptimisticUpdate` helpers are **experimental** and may change in future versions. For production applications, we recommend using the [manual pattern](#manual-pattern) below until these helpers stabilize.
:::

The `createOptimisticUpdate` helper simplifies the optimistic update pattern by handling the boilerplate:

```typescript
import { createOptimisticUpdate } from '@navios/react-query'

const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  ...createOptimisticUpdate({
    queryKey: ['users', userId],
    updateFn: (oldData, variables) => ({
      ...oldData,
      ...variables.data,
    }),
  }),
})
```

### Configuration Options

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `queryKey` | `readonly unknown[]` | Required | The query key to optimistically update |
| `updateFn` | `(oldData, variables) => newData` | Required | Function to compute the new cache value |
| `rollbackOnError` | `boolean` | `true` | Whether to rollback on error |
| `invalidateOnSettled` | `boolean` | `true` | Whether to invalidate the query after mutation settles |

### Multi-Query Updates

:::warning Experimental API
`createMultiOptimisticUpdate` is **experimental** and may change in future versions.
:::

When a mutation affects multiple cached queries, use `createMultiOptimisticUpdate`:

```typescript
import { createMultiOptimisticUpdate } from '@navios/react-query'

const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  ...createMultiOptimisticUpdate([
    {
      // Update individual user cache
      queryKey: ['users', userId],
      updateFn: (oldData, variables) => ({
        ...oldData,
        ...variables.data,
      }),
    },
    {
      // Update user in the list
      queryKey: ['users'],
      updateFn: (oldList, variables) =>
        (oldList ?? []).map((user) =>
          user.id === userId ? { ...user, ...variables.data } : user
        ),
    },
  ]),
})
```

### Common Patterns with Helpers

**Optimistic Delete:**

```typescript
const deleteTodo = client.mutation({
  method: 'DELETE',
  url: '/todos/$todoId',
  responseSchema: z.object({ success: z.boolean() }),
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({ queryClient: useQueryClient() }),
  ...createOptimisticUpdate({
    queryKey: ['todos'],
    updateFn: (oldData, variables) =>
      (oldData ?? []).filter((t) => t.id !== variables.urlParams.todoId),
  }),
})
```

**Optimistic Add:**

```typescript
const addTodo = client.mutation({
  method: 'POST',
  url: '/todos',
  requestSchema: createTodoSchema,
  responseSchema: todoSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({ queryClient: useQueryClient() }),
  ...createOptimisticUpdate({
    queryKey: ['todos'],
    updateFn: (oldData, variables) => [
      ...(oldData ?? []),
      { id: 'temp-' + Date.now(), ...variables.data, createdAt: new Date() },
    ],
  }),
})
```

## Manual Pattern (Recommended)

For production applications, we recommend implementing the optimistic update pattern manually. This gives you full control and doesn't depend on experimental APIs.

### Pattern Overview

The manual optimistic update pattern involves:

1. **onMutate**: Cancel queries, snapshot previous value, optimistically update
2. **onError**: Rollback to previous value
3. **onSuccess/onSettled**: Refetch to ensure consistency

### Manual Example

```typescript
const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    // 1. Cancel outgoing queries
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUser.queryKey.filterKey({
        urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
      }),
    })

    // 2. Snapshot previous value
    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUser.queryKey.dataTag({
        urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
      })
    )

    // 3. Optimistically update
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUser.queryKey.dataTag({
        urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
      }),
      { ...previous, ...variables.data }
    )

    // 4. Return context for rollback
    return { previous }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    // Rollback on error
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUser.queryKey.dataTag({
          urlParams: { userId: variables.urlParams.userId },
        }),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
  onSuccess: (data, variables, context) => {
    // Optionally refetch to ensure consistency
    context.queryClient.invalidateQueries({
      queryKey: getUser.queryKey.filterKey({
        urlParams: { userId: data.id },
      }),
    })
  },
})
```

## Updating Lists

Optimistically update items in a list:

```typescript
const updateUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'PUT',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  requestSchema: userUpdateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUsers.queryKey.filterKey({}),
    })

    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({})
    )

    // Update item in list
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return old
        return {
          ...old,
          users: old.users.map((user) =>
            user.id === variables.urlParams.userId
              ? { ...user, ...variables.data }
              : user
          ),
        }
      }
    )

    return { previous }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
})
```

## Adding to Lists

Optimistically add items to a list:

```typescript
const createUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'POST',
  url: '/users',
  requestSchema: userCreateSchema,
  responseSchema: userSchema,
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUsers.queryKey.filterKey({}),
    })

    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({})
    )

    // Optimistically add new user
    const optimisticUser = {
      id: 'temp-' + Date.now(),
      ...variables.data,
      createdAt: new Date().toISOString(),
    }

    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return { users: [optimisticUser] }
        return {
          ...old,
          users: [optimisticUser, ...old.users],
        }
      }
    )

    return { previous, optimisticUser }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
  onSuccess: (data, variables, context) => {
    // Replace optimistic user with real data
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return old
        return {
          ...old,
          users: old.users.map((user) =>
            user.id === context.onMutateResult?.optimisticUser.id
              ? data
              : user
          ),
        }
      }
    )
  },
})
```

## Removing from Lists

Optimistically remove items from a list:

```typescript
const deleteUser = client.mutation({
  method: 'DELETE',
  url: '/users/$userId',
  responseSchema: z.object({ success: z.boolean() }),
  processResponse: (data) => data,
  useContext: () => ({
    queryClient: useQueryClient(),
  }),
  onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
    await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({
      queryKey: getUsers.queryKey.filterKey({}),
    })

    const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({})
    )

    // Optimistically remove user
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(
      getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
      (old: { users: User[] } | undefined) => {
        if (!old) return old
        return {
          ...old,
          users: old.users.filter(
            (user) => user.id !== variables.urlParams.userId
          ),
        }
      }
    )

    return { previous }
  },
  onError: (error, variables, context) => {
    if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
      context.queryClient.setQueryData(
        getUsers.queryKey.dataTag({}),
        context.onMutateResult.previous
      )
    }
  },
})
```

## Best Practices

### Always Cancel Queries

```typescript
// ✅ Good - cancel queries first
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  await context.queryClient.cancelQueries({ queryKey: ['users'] })
  // ... rest of logic
}

// ❌ Bad - may cause race conditions
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  // Missing cancelQueries
  context.queryClient.setQueryData(/* ... */)
}
```

### Snapshot Previous Value

```typescript
// ✅ Good - save previous for rollback
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  const previous = context.queryClient.getQueryData(/* ... */)
  // ... update
  return { previous }
}

// ❌ Bad - can't rollback
onMutate: async (variables, context) => {
  context.queryClient.setQueryData(/* ... */)
  // No previous value saved
}
```

### Rollback on Error

```typescript
// ✅ Good - rollback on error
onError: (error, variables, context) => {
  if (context.onMutateResult?.previous) {
    context.queryClient.setQueryData(/* ... */, context.onMutateResult.previous)
  }
}

// ❌ Bad - no rollback
onError: (error, variables, context) => {
  // UI stays in optimistic state even on error
}
```

## Next Steps

- [Context in Mutations](/docs/builder/react-query/guides/mutation-context) - Access QueryClient
- [Mutations](/docs/builder/react-query/guides/mutations) - Basic mutations
- [Query Keys](/docs/builder/react-query/guides/query-keys) - Understand query keys
